---
layout: reveal
title: "Rules & Rulers/Tradition"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [11,slides]
image: palace-ceiling.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/palace-ceiling.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### Rules & Rulers/Tradition

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Course Review

A little game to jog your memory ...

<!-- https://jeopardylabs.com/play/entangled-stories -->

## Review: A New Community

- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Previous Objective: For the formation of the early Islamic community, identify which aspects can be traced and which ones remain open questions.

## Review: Epistemic Gap

The importance of what we *don't* know
- filling the gap involves methodology (historical-critical, etc.)
- methodology involves assumptions (Orientalist, Islamic tradition, etc.)
- arguments perhaps for what is *plausible* rather than *probable*
- larger knowledge gap regarding Jewish than regarding Christian communities?

## Review: The Ingredients of Community

Establishing group identity through 
- recognizing characteristics held in common, 
- creating shared experiences, 
- and distinguishing the group from others.

## Review: Two Sources Possibly from Muhammad's Lifetime

- Quran
- "Constitution of Medina"

## Review: Constitution of Medina

- An agreement (purportedly from Medina during Muhammad's stay there) stating that various groups will support one another in battle, etc.
- Within one community (*umma*), several groups are mentioned including tribes, Muʾminūn and Muslimūn (is there a difference?), and Jews (possibly as Muʾminūn) (see Lindstedt 2021)
- Muhammad as a leader (drafting the agreement and arbitrating)

## Review: Jews, Christians, Muminun (believers), and Muslims in the Quran

- In Q, the word *muminun* (believers) more typically identifies the community than *muslimun* (submitters, see Lindstedt 2021)
- Some Scripture People "believe" and are "righteous" (Q 3:113-114) -- are they included in the community of believers?
- Jews & Christians in Q are called to acknowledge the revelation to Muhammad, are sometimes spoken of positively, but are also sometimes criticized for disputes, false beliefs, and breaking God's commands.
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review: Jews, Christians, Muminun (believers), and Muslims in the Quran

- What accounts for the mixed attitude in Q toward Jews and Christians?
  - Is it a chronological development, that earlier parts of the Quran reflect the situation before the Jews of Medina turned against Muhammad (as in the traditional _sira_/biography and _asbab al-nuzul_/occasions of revelation literature)?
  - Do the positive references to them refer only to those who eventually accepted Muhammad as God's messenger (so later interpreters, e.g. al-Jahiz)?
  - Or does Q leave open the possibility that some Scripture People were seen as part of a larger community together with the community following Muhammad's message (see Lindstedt 2021)?

## Today's Objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Describe why _hadith_ and _fiqh_ (jurisprudence) became important for establishing a civil society that included both Muslims and non-Muslims.

## Outline

1. Introduction: A "Muslim" World?
2. _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture
3. _Fiqh_: Negotiating civil society

## Introduction: A "Muslim" World?

"Muslim" world? "Islamic" world? "Islamicate" world?

## Introduction: A "Muslim" World?

Richard Bulliet, _The Conversion Curve_

## Introduction: A "Muslim" World?

Establishing a civil society

## Sources (some of many) for the early Abbasid period

- hadith collections
- Islamic jurisprudence treatises, Christian canon law, Jewish responsa
- histories and biographical dictionaries, sometimes preserving documents
- documentary (contracts, letters, etc.)
- archeology

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

How should the Quran be applied? (That is, within the range of meanings of a quranic command, how does one understand the course of action to take in a given situation?)
- related: _sira_ (biography of Muhammad) and _asbab al-nuzul_ (occasions of revelation of Quran)

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

> Sahih al-Bukhari 2 (<https://sunnah.com/bukhari:2>): Abd Allah b. Yusuf transmitted to us, "Malik transmitted to us from Hisham b. Urwa from his father from Aisha Mother of the Believers (God be pleased with her)" [_isnad_]
"Al-Harith bin Hisham asked Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) "O Allah's Messenger (ﷺ)! How is the Divine Inspiration revealed to you?" Allah's Messenger (ﷺ) replied, "Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell, this form of Inspiration is the hardest of all and then this state passes off after I have grasped what is inspired. Sometimes the Angel comes in the form of a man and talks to me and I grasp whatever he says." 'Aisha added: Verily I saw the Prophet (ﷺ) being inspired divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was over)." [_matn_]
{: .r-fit-text}

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

- Example: wine in Quran (2:219, 4:43, 5:90-93)

> Sunan an-Nasa'i 5699 (<https://sunnah.com/nasai:5699>): It was narrated that Ibn 'Umar said: "Every intoxicant is Khamr and every intoxicant is unlawful.
{: .r-fit-text}

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

hadith criticism (traditional and modern)

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

- oral or aural? (Schoeler 2004)
- Parallels to Jewish and Christian oral tradition

## _Hadith_: A means to interpret scripture

_Ahl al-hadith_, _Ahl al-sunna_

## _Fiqh_: Negotiating civil society

How do Muslims live in and govern a mixed Muslim/non-Muslim society?

## _Fiqh_: Negotiating civil society

Parallels to Jewish and Christian law

## _Fiqh_: Negotiating civil society

_Ahl al-kitab_, _Ahl al-dhimma_, and the "Covenant of Umar" (Levy-Rubin)

## _Fiqh_: Negotiating civil society

Legal pluralism (Simonsohn)

## Preview

A Common Language