---
layout: reveal
title: "A Common Language"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [12,slides]
image: ox-bodl-laud-or-258-fol-10b.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/ox-bodl-laud-or-258-fol-10b.jpg'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### A Common Language

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Review

You can play jeopardy on your own: 

<https://jeopardylabs.com/play/entangled-stories>

## Review: Tradition/Rules & Rulers

- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Previous Objective: Describe why _hadith_ and _fiqh_ (jurisprudence) became important for establishing a civil society that included both Muslims and non-Muslims.

## Review: Tradition/Rules & Rulers

- In many regions, the populations Muslim rulers governed were majority non-Muslim for several centuries. (Bulliet's work should be correctly interpreted!)
- "Islamic" rule had to be defined. How should the Quran apply to the governance of society, including non-Muslims? ("Islamicate" as an alternate term for the period/region.)
- Lots of sources: religious, legal, literary, documentary
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review: Tradition

- Muslim communities, like Jewish and Christian ones before them, faced the question of how to interpret scripture.
- Traditions for interpreting the Quran included
  - What did Muhammad say or do? (Including _hadith_ and the _sira_, biography of Muhammad)
  - When/in what circumstances were certain portions of the Quran revealed? (_asbab al-nuzul_, occasions of revelation)
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review: Tradition

- Hadith as a means to interpret the Quran
  - _isnad_ (chain of transmission) + _matn_ (content)
  - Example: whether drinking wine is permissible
  - hadith criticism (traditional and modern)
  - debate over hadith's importance came to a head in 3rd/9th century, a major impetus for the Sunni development of Islam
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review: _Fiqh_ (jurisprudence)

- civil & religious law difficult to distinguish in late antique societies
- Jewish and Christian jurisprudence included not just "religious" (i.e., cultic) aspects but also family law, dispute arbitration, etc.
- _sharia_ wasn't originally a rigid set of predetermined fundamentalist rules but rather an ideal of finding the right "path" through interpretation (compare Jewish _halakhah_)
{: .r-fit-text}

## Review: _Fiqh_ (jurisprudence)

- _Ahl al-dhimma_ - non-Muslim subjects protected by agreements with Muslims, with certain requirements (such as payment of the _jizya_ tax)
- The "Covenant of Umar" - a retrospective generalization (ca. 9th cent.?) of various restrictions on _ahl al-dhimma_, e.g. places of worship, dress, weapons
- Legal pluralism & "forum shopping"

## Excursus: Qaraites

Jewish movement, started ca. 9th cent.?

## Today's Objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Describe how Jewish, Christian, and Islamic traditions both contributed _to_ "Golden Age" Arabic written culture and were themselves transformed _by_ it. 

## Outline

1. Intro: The concept of a common language or _lingua franca_
2. The Great Convergence (a.k.a. "Golden Age"): Literary and scholarly practices
3. Inner transformations: Post-convergence Judaism, Christianity, and Islam

## Intro: The concept of a common language or _lingua franca_

Consider: In what areas of life is English a widely shared language and why? 

## Intro: Arabic as a common language

- Aramaic had paved the way
- A semitic language with a similar grammar and writing system + cognates

## The Great Convergence: Where is it seen?

- Writing practices
  - materials, bookbinding 
  - layout, headers, illumination
  - right-to-left scripts, diacritics, vocalization

## The Great Convergence: Where is it seen?

- Knowledge practices
  - administrative & scribal
  - literary forms
    - authorship
    - prose genres
  - translation

## The Great Convergence: Where is it seen?

- Knowledge practices (cont.)
  - teaching circles
  - field-specific knowledge
  - intertextuality

## The Great Convergence: How did it happen?

- Precursors of literary forms
  - scholarly treatises (Syriac & Greek)
  - belletristic, mirror for princes (Persia & India)
  - kalam (possibly Syriac)
  - literary dialogue/debate (Syriac & ancient Mesopotamian)

## The Great Convergence: How did it happen?

- Precursors of field-specific knowledge
  - medicine (Greek & Syriac)
  - astronomy (Greek & Persian)
  - grammar & lexicography (Persian, possibly also Syriac)

## The Great Convergence: How did it happen?

- Precursors of field-specific knowledge (cont.)
  - mathematics & numerals (Persian, Indian, Greek)
  - philosophy & theology (Greek & Syriac)
  - scriptural commentary & exegesis (Hebrew/Aramaic, Syriac, Greek)

## The Great Convergence: Significance

- Not derivative or unidirectional
- A "whirlpool effect" (Stroumsa) or transculturation
- A "golden age" of knowledge production (including a golden age *in* Islam but not attributable to one particular religion)
- Through profound intercultural & interreligious collaboration

## The Great Convergence: Significance

A so-far understudied question: What was the role of religious affiliation, religious practices, and religious affiliation in this knowledge production?

## Inner transformations: Post-convergence Judaism, Christianity, and Islam

- Bible translation into Arabic (for study? for liturgy/public reading?)
- Arabic as a medium of 
  - *inter*communal theological disputation (with Greek philosophical and biblical pillars)
  - *intra*communal theological discourse and commentary
- Widespread adoption of Arabic forms such as *kalam* across communities
- New writing system: Judeo-Arabic

## Inner transformations: Post-convergence Judaism, Christianity, and Islam

- Formation of Jewish literature (authorship, genres, subjects studied)
- Syriac Renaissance: 11th-13th century integration of topics and genres from Arabic into Syriac
- 12th cent. European Renaissance with translation from Greek and Arabic

## Preview

Converted (and Unconverted) Conquerors