---
layout: reveal
title: "10. A New Community"
author: "Nathan Gibson"
tags: [10,slides]
image: dome-of-the-rock.jpg
parallaxBackgroundImage: 'assets/img/dome-of-the-rock-50per.png'
---

# Entangled Stories 

### The History of Jewish-Christian-Muslim Relations in the Premodern Near East

### 10. A New Community

Winter Semester 2023  
Prof. Dr. Nathan Gibson

## Course Review

A little game to jog your memory ...

<!-- https://jeopardylabs.com/play/entangled-stories -->

## Review - Feedback

## Review: A New Prophet

- <i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> Previous Objective: Outline some of the ways the Quran engages with Judaism and Christianity, and assess the historical basis for these features.

## Review: A New Prophet

- Historical Sources: Quran, "Constitution" of Medina, Arabian inscriptions, Arabic poetry, (later) Islamic traditions, (farther away) texts in Syriac, Greek, etc.
- What is the Quran? Arabic language, oral "recitation," *sura*s (chapters) arranged longest to shortest (not chronological), more uniform in genre/discourse types than Bible 

## Review: A New Prophet

- What does the Quran say about itself?
  - a recitation
  - guidance
  - revelation
- What does the Quran say about Muhammad?
  - very little biographical material
  - prophetic template

## Review: A New Prophet

- Jews & Christians in the Quran
  - called "Scripture People" (or "People of the Book")
  - invited to acknowledge the revelation Muhammad brings
  - criticized for 
    - false beliefs (especially God having children)
    - disputes
    - false worship & unfaithfulness

## Review: A New Prophet

- Bible in the Quran
  - stories of prophets
  - reference to previous scriptures and instructions/laws
  - not usually direct citations

## Excursus: Epistemic Gap

The importance of what we *don't* know
- filling the gap involves methodology (historical-critical, etc.)
- methodology involves assumptions (Orientalist, Islamic tradition, etc.)
- arguments perhaps for what is *plausible* rather than *probable*

## Today's Objective

<i class="fa-solid fa-check"></i> For the formation of the early Islamic community, identify which aspects can be traced and which ones remain open questions.

## Outline

1. Introduction: The Ingredients of Community
2. The Early Years (Muhammad's Lifetime)
3. The First Caliphs
4. The Umayyad Caliphs

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

What does it take to create a new community?

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

Establishing group identity through 
- recognizing characteristics held in common, 
- creating shared experiences, 
- and distinguishing the group from others.

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

- common characteristics vs. distinctions, e.g.
  - language
  - ethnicity
  - beliefs

## Introduction: The Ingredients of Community

- shared experiences, e.g.
  - leadership
  - spaces
  - events
  - crises

## The Early Years (Muhammad's Lifetime)

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/kennedy-arabia-hijra.jpg' fit='contain' %}

<figcaption>Kennedy, Hugh, “Arabia in the Time of the Ḥijra (622 A.D.)”, in: Historical Atlas of Islam, Edited by: Hugh Kennedy. Consulted online on 18 December 2023 <http://dx.doi.org./10.1163/1573-3912_hai_HAI_16B></figcaption>

## The Early Years: Two (possible) Sources from Muhammad's Lifetime

- Quran
- "Constitution of Medina"

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina

> "Constitution of Medina" (trans. Lecker 2012): 1. This is a compact from Muḥammad the prophet, between the Muʾminūn and Muslimūn of the Quraysh and Yathrib and those who join them as clients, attach themselves to them, and fight the holy war with them. 2. They constitute one people to the exclusion of others.
{: .r-fit-text}

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina

> "Constitution of Medina" (trans. Lecker 2012): 3. The Muhājirūn from the Quraysh keep to their tribal organisation and leadership, cooperating with each other regarding blood money [and related matters] and ransoming their captives according to what is customary and equitable among the Muʾminūn. 4. The Banū ʿAwf keep to their tribal organisation and leadership ... 
{: .r-fit-text}

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina

> "Constitution of Medina" (trans. Lecker 2012): 14. The god-fearing Muʾminūn are against whosoever of them demands an excessive sum of blood money or desires a gift of injustice, sin, transgression, or evil among the Muʾminūn. They shall all unite against him, even if he is the son of one of them. 15. A Muʾmin will not kill a Muʾmin in retaliation for a non-believer and will not aid a non-believer against a Muʾmin. 16. The protection of God [as extended by the Muʾminūn] is unvarying, [and hence] the least of them is entitled to grant protection that is binding for all of them. 17. The Muʾminūn are each other’s allies, to the exclusion of other people. 
{: .r-fit-text}

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina

> "Constitution of Medina" (trans. Lecker 2012): 18. The Jews who join us as clients will receive aid and equal rights; they will not be wronged, nor will their enemies be aided against them ... 27. The Jews share expenses with the Muʾminūn as long as they are at war. 28. The Jews of Banū ʿAwf are secure [reading amana/āmina/amina instead of umma] from the Muʾminūn. The Jews have their religion and the Muslimūn have theirs. [This applies to] their allies and their persons. But whoever acts unjustly and sins will destroy only himself and his agnates.
{: .r-fit-text}

## The Early Years: Constitution of Medina

> "Constitution of Medina" (trans. Lecker 2012): 26. Whatever you differ about should be brought before God and Muḥammad.
{: .r-fit-text}


## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

[Q 3:110–120](https://quran.com/3/110-120) 

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

- Jews & Christians in the Quran (primarily from *sura*s 2, 4, 5, and 9)
  - are called "Scripture People" (or "People of the Book"). Their prophets and scriptures are acknowledged as bringing God's revelation
  - are called to acknowledge Muhammad and the revelation he brings (5:15)
    - but want Muhammad (?) or Muslims (?) to follow their religion (2:120, 2:135)
    - demand signs from Muhammad (4:153)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

  - Jews & Christians in the Quran are criticized for false beliefs
    - Christians claiming God has adopted or begotten a son (2:116, 9:30)
    - Christians claiming God is the Messiah son of Mary (5:17)
    - Jews and Christians claiming to be God's children (5:18)
    - Jews claiming Ezra is the son of God (9:30)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

  - Jews & Christians in the Quran are criticized for their disputes (between Christians and Jews, 2:113, and among Christians, 5:14)
  - are criticized for their false worship and unfaithfulness in history and the present
    - Jews and Christians for taking their religious leaders as lords besides God (9:31)
    - (Israelites?) for breaking God's covenant, slandering Mary, and claiming to have killed Jesus (4:154-157, 5:12-13)

## The Early Years: Jews & Christians in the Quran

- Jews & Christians in the Quran (false worship & unfaithfulness cont.)
    - Christians for breaking God's covenant, distorting the words of Scripture, and being deceitful (5:13, but Muhammad is told to forgive them)
    - Christians for (apparently) worshiping Jesus and his mother as gods (5:116)
    - Jewish and Christian religious leaders for unjustly taking the people's wealth (9:34)

## The Early Years: Summary

Jews and Christians not 100% included or excluded.

## The First Caliphs

The "rightly-guided" or *rashidun* caliphs: 

Abu Bakr (r. 632-634 CE/11-13 AH)  
Umar (r. 634-644 CE/13-23 AH)  
Uthman (r. 644-656 CE/23-35 AH)  
Ali (r. 656-661 CE/35-40 AH)

## The First Caliphs

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/kennedy-conquests.jpg' fit='contain' %}

<figcaption>Kennedy, Hugh, “Early Muslim Conquests”, in: Historical Atlas of Islam, Edited by: Hugh Kennedy. Consulted online on 8 January 2024 <http://dx.doi.org./10.1163/1573-3912_hai_HAI_7></figcaption>

## The Umayyad Caliphs

- 661-750 CE
- governance largely in regional languages and systems
- converts adopted an ethnic identity via *mawla* system

## The Umayyad Caliphs

{% include img-row.html images='assets/img/kennedy-umayyad.jpg' fit='contain' %}

<figcaption>Kennedy, Hugh, "The Umayyad Caliphate circa 132/750”, in: Historical Atlas of Islam, Edited by: Hugh Kennedy. Consulted online on 8 January 2024 <http://dx.doi.org./10.1163/1573-3912_hai_HAI_8></figcaption>

## Conclusion: Aspects of Community Formation

- common characteristics & distinctions, e.g.
  - language
  - ethnicity
  - beliefs

## Conclusion: Aspects of Community Formation

- shared experiences, e.g.
  - leadership
  - spaces
  - events
  - crises

## Preview

Rules & Rulers/Tradition